---
title:  "Pandemic and Peacefulness Part I"
description: Reflection on Meditation and Mental Health
last-edit: 2020-07-29
date: 2020-07-24 
words: 3,628 
time: 14 min 30 sec
---

### Introduction
No talking, no exercising, no reading, no writing, and no technology. We, over 200 men and women — ranging from ardent atheists to devout Hindus and from Rajasthani farmers to European travelers — came together on the outskirts of Jaipur, India, for ten days in January. In silence, we meditated. Now, in quarantine, I realize genuinely how significant this meditation retreat was for me.  

This essay, published in three parts, is on the observations I made and insights I gained on the meditation retreat. They are on the nature of mind and its capacity to cause suffering. The insights, in part, form what I call a *meditator's perspective* — a perspective that is relevant in the context of the pandemic for two reasons.

First, the daily practice of meditation and the perspective it helps me adopt is an incredible tool, now more so than before. There are plenty of bad days, but meditation cushions the lows and sweetens the highs. Second, the retreat and pandemic put me in a psychologically similar situation. In both, the combination of heightened isolation with minimal external stimulation forced me to reckon with and experience my mind more fully. Thus an analysis of the retreat can help us understand, cope, and thrive in the pandemic. 

A reality of life with the coronavirus is the barrage of information from news and social media about it. The latest alarming infection numbers, promising clinical studies, gloomy economic forecast, and more have dominated our conversations and media. This information is crucial, but in excess harmful. We are not talking enough about the everyday psychological challenges the coronavirus brings with it. These challenges, like the virus itself, are pressing, devastating, and spread invisibly. The purpose of this part - the first of three - is to spur conversations we seldom have about mental health and everyday psychological suffering and to situate the same in the framework of meditation. 

Before I begin, there are a few essential clarifications to make. First, the term meditation has many meanings. Meditation, as I use it, is the deliberate practice of directing your attention to the mind and body. It is not about ritual, god, religion, or the supernatural. It is absurdly simple; non-judgmental observation of the mind and body. 

Second, to help scrutinize, understand, and share my experience, I bring academic voices from psychology, neuroscience, and philosophy into dialogue with meditation. External literature has helped me understand and subject my experience to rigor. This essay, however, is grounded in *my experience* on a retreat, and in the six months that followed. I do not want to minimize the "I." I want to emphasize it. The importance and inescapability of subjective experience, particularly in self-understanding, raises interesting epistemic questions. I probe these questions, on the on the denial of subjectivity, limits of objectivity and the nature of self-knowledge, in part III of this essay, which focuses on the philosophical and societal implications of the meditator's perspective.  

Third, I use the Buddhist concept of [*duhkha*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Du%E1%B8%A5kha) in this essay to refer to widespread, everyday psychological suffering. Early religion scholars translated *duhkha* as "unhappiness," "pain," "unsatisfactoriness," "anxiety," or "stress"[^1]. Conceptually *duhkha* encompasses all of these ideas. Scholars today use the term as is, and I will do the same. *Duhkha* is not the physical pain of stubbing your pinky toe; it is the mental beating you give yourself afterward. *Duhkha* is the feeling of stress, anxiety, angst, worthlessness, and jealousy that can come from anywhere at any time. It is the general psychological distress we feel because we are self-conscious and social. We set goals and fall short, get rejected and feel insecure, ponder death and feel afraid, and so much more. *Duhkha* can be subtle or crushing. It is, however, avoidable through training your mind and its default behavioral patterns. I will elaborate further on this concept later. 

Lastly, I am neither qualified, nor do I intend to write about how to meditate. I highly recommend the [Headspace](https://www.headspace.com/) or [Waking Up](https://www.wakingup.com/) applications for this. I have used Headspace for over three years. Andy, the creator, is knowledgeable, experienced, and teaches meditations with all the nuance and simplicity that it requires. He trained as a monk, so the guided meditations are authentic to the tradition. At the same time, he brings the ideas and perspective of meditation into the modern world exceptionally. I also recently enjoyed Sam Harris' Waking Up app. Sam, for all his faults, has always been brilliant on the subject of meditation. His theoretical approach emphasizes the nature of consciousness. Both are great. Now, when the mental well-being of everyone is a serious concern, it is an excellent time to give either a try.

#### The *Vipassana* Retreat
On the retreat, we practiced a meditation technique called *Vipassana*. One of the oldest recorded meditation techniques, the practice of *Vipassana*, was first developed in the *Satipatthana Sutta* (Foundations of Mindfulness) — a core text traced directly to the Buddha[^2]. The Pali word *Vipassana* roughly translates to "insight." 

In *Vipassana* meditators focus their attention on spontaneous physical sensations. They observe sensations and begin to notice their mind's automatic reactive patterns. Our minds continuously react to both physical and mental stimuli  which include thoughts, memories, moods, and more. These reactions shape the "narrative" the mind continuously constructs and unconsciously projects onto the world. The narratives are our minds running commentary on our experience. In these narratives, we relive the past, judge the present, and project into the future.  We create the conditions for suffering when lost in our self-constructed narratives. The problem is not that we create these narratives, but that we are *unaware* of them.

I was shocked by how oblivious I was to my mind; despite a consistent daily meditation practice over three years, a few days into the retreat, my head, and its contents felt foreign and chaotic. In the moments of clarity amidst countless hours of meditation, I started to notice the close link between my mind and body. I started to see why and how I was thinking and feeling what I was thinking and feeling. Each moment I categorized stimuli as pleasant and unpleasant. I reacted by trying to prolong the pleasant ones by clinging onto them, and avoid the unpleasant ones by evading them. I will elaborate on the details of craving and aversion in part II. This retreat has changed how I understand my mind.  

I noticed this unconscious process reinforce itself. A wandering thought or physical sensation elicits a reaction, which creates another thought or sensation to which I would react again. This endless loop of thinking, judging, craving, or avoiding, is where we experience *duhkha*. During the retreat, the delicate silence of the meditation hall starkly contrasted with the deafening narrative spinning in my head.

At first, I thought that the lack of external stimulation during the retreat caused this chaotic activity. I was wrong. The silent conditions on retreat helped me notice how my mind *had always been*. Daily life and its chaos drowned out the cacophony in my head. 

*Vipassana* is about developing self-awareness; recognizing and understanding the unconscious behaviors of the mind is how one breaks the cycle of stimuli, reaction, narrative, and *duhkha*. One gains "insight" into one's mind by watching it. In becoming aware of its often harmful, self-destructive, conditioned behaviors, they are no longer as destructive as they were when they were unnoticed.   

Meditation sounds pleasant; it can be. But it can also be painful. I would be lying if I said it was easy. I thought about quitting many times. I felt miserable. Miserable because I felt like I wasn't doing it right, and I was falling behind everyone else. Miserable because of the unbearable pain in my legs from sitting for so long. Miserable because of the intolerable boredom. I was hungry, cold, sleepy, and uncomfortable, the list was endless, and each day there was a different reason I gave myself to be miserable. 

*Vipassana* is about changing your understanding and relationship with self-inflicted misery (*duhkha*). It is about seeing beyond the categorization of pleasant and unpleasant and experiencing reality as it is, not what you want it to be. The retreat is designed to help you see how *you construct* your misery.  

The pandemic has its own set of psychological challenges: reminding us of our mortality, keeping us uncertainty, and exposing the illusion of control. The conditions of the pandemic make our minds more fragile, but these challenges exist whether we are in a pandemic or not, or whether we are diagnosed as mentally "ill" or not. Regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or socio-economic status, everyone suffers *in this way*. Not equally, but in some way. Meditation is an indispensable tool for dealing with life, not just the pandemic. 

This kind of suffering - *duhkha* - is poorly understood in Western society. The consequences of this misunderstanding are evident in the treatment of the extreme case of psychological suffering - mental "illness."

#### *Duhkha* and Mental Health 
Even as a growing number of Americans have started to meditate, most mental health professionals and academics still treat the practice with reductive skepticism. As Sam Harris puts it, "most present the practice as though it were an ancient version of an executive stress ball—whereas it's more like the Hubble Space Telescope." I began meditating to gain an edge as a competitive student-athlete in high school. It has helped, but to use meditation as a stress buster or productivity hack would be like to use a rocket thruster to roast a marsh-mellow. It does the job, but the tool can do a lot more. Western society undervalues meditation because it does not sufficiently acknowledge the everyday psychological suffering caused by self-harming patterns of perception. Namely, it does not acknowledge or understand *duhkha*. 

This blind spot persists in part because of three historically recent, but culturally ingrained misconceptions. First, psychological suffering is primarily understood as a pathology, a sign of biological abnormality. Second, as a result, mental illness is treated in a reductive biological way. Third, mental health is a binary - you are either "healthy" or "ill," and an arbitrary point separating the two exists. 

Most proponents of the biological model of mental illness have a far more nuanced take. However, these misconceptions have taken hold at the cultural level. From the language used to discuss psychological suffering and mental health to the institutions which treat the same, the reductively biological explanation of mental illness has become the one-size-fits-all scapegoat for psychological suffering in Western society. Especially now, these over-generalized, simplifications of psychological suffering and mental illness cause more harm than good.

On a societal level, this understanding is convenient since it abdicates blame. The mentally "ill" individual has a "disease" that doctors "treat." We do not need to critically examine the cultural, socio-political climate, or economic circumstances of the individual. We ignore and minimize the situation which bred the "illness" and blame it on biology. We stick our heads in the sand and let doctors tell us we are chronically in need of anti-depressants, anti-anxiety medication, and pills of all kinds to function. Pills are far easier to swallow than uncomfortable truths. BigPharma profits and governments don't have to fund expensive mental health initiatives. To question this thinking, they say, is to minimize the real suffering those with mental illness face. Nothing could be farther from my intention. 

This misconception harms individuals in two ways. First, treatment is indiscriminately medical. Psychiatry has morphed into the practice of drug prescription - many have turned away from therapy altogether. Psychotropic drugs are covered by health insurance over therapy in the US, which is a major reason for its prevalence. Spending on these drugs has increased six fold from 1987 to 2001[^3]. The latest estimate I could find from 2013(!) found that 1 in 6 American adults, roughly 17%, were taking at least one psychiatric drug, up from 10% in 2011[^4]. I reasonably assume usage has increased in the last seven years. I do not doubt medication is needed, but it is overused. Some argue it causes more harm than good[^5]. The increasing medicalization of mental health pushes professionals to focus on treating *symptoms*, not *people*. 

Second, these misconceptions confuse the individuals personal understanding of their suffering. Suffering, professionals say either outright or implicit in treatment, is the result of abnormal biological functioning. To reduce all experience of suffering to biology is false and out of touch with experience. Mentally "healthy" people suffer all the time for a range of reasons. These other causes of suffering, at best, are acknowledged as minor and, at worst, ignored when compared against biology. The medicalized, binary minimizes the space to suffer in dangerous ways. For a mentally "healthy" person, there is no space for them to suffer and feel valid without a diagnosis. Psychological suffering has become medicalized, and this is entirely untrue. 

These persistent misconceptions rest on an overly simplistic concept of psychological suffering. To dislodge them, the concept and causes of psychological suffering must be further nuanced. I do this by distinguishing between *psycho-pathological* suffering, caused by biology, and *psycho-perceptual suffering*, *duhkha*, caused by perception. By broadening the West's concept of psychological suffering, it complicates the medicalized, binary of mental health.

Before I continue, I want to be clear. The distinction between *duhkha* and *psycho-pathological* suffering in no way depreciates the painful reality of mental disorders. Some mental disorders cause suffering because of abnormal biological functioning. It can be incapacitating and overwhelming. Most diagnosed experience both kinds of suffering, and almost everyone experiences *duhkha*. My point is biology is not the **only** or the **most common** cause of psychological suffering. Culturally, the Western world has thought it is. 

Dr. Robert Sapolsky, a prominent professor of biology and neurology at Stanford, is one of many researchers whose work is gesturing toward a broader understanding of psychological distress. Sapolsky found a mismatch between the stressors we face in the modern world and our response to them. The stress response, commonly known as fight-flight, is designed to prepare you for immediate danger. Your system floods with a cocktail of neurochemicals to prepare you for fight-flight. But in today's world, we trigger the response more frequently and for prolonged periods. Not because our lives are in danger, but because we have a deadline, feel embarrassed, or as though our social status is threatened, for example. Filled with "psycho-social stressors," the modern world, and our response to it keeps us chronically stressed. The biological consequences are devastating: compromised immune system, an increased risk of early-onset diabetes, erectile dysfunction, disrupted menstrual cycles, obesity, anxiety, depression, heart disease, to name a few[^6].

The relevant insight from Sapolsky's work is that an unhealthy perception of the stressor causes biological consequences. In the simplest terms, we overreact. Even though his work focuses on the biological effects, it points to *faulty perception* as the underlying cause. Both cause and effect are compelling, of course, but a clear understanding of the cause is far more useful. With *psycho-pathological* suffering as the effect caused by abnormal biological functioning, it follows that medications are a solution. With *duhkha* as the effect caused by self-harming perception, it follows that meditation is a solution. 
 
Understanding the causes of intense psychological suffering as multi-faceted is better for many reasons. Explicitly, it corrects the misconceptions I mentioned earlier. *Duhkha* normalizes (perceptual) psychological suffering, but it does not *naturalize* it. By definition, *duhkha* can be overcome since perception is malleable, unlike biology, which can only be dealt with through medication. Conceptually this distinction helps acknowledge that life is full of heartache, disappointment, and self-doubt. There are good reasons to feel immense psychological tormented beyond biology. Understanding this helps deal with this suffering and inspires confidence in mental health professionals. As individuals, we don't surrender to the dichotomy, *suffer or medicate*, but understand our psychological distress, and it's (many) causes precisely. Mental health practitioners, society, and all of us should work towards helping people cope with and understand their *duhkha* - not just their *psycho-pathological* suffering. 

Also, the normalization of *duhkha* helps chip away at the toxic, particularly Western, ingrained, self-understanding that we should be "happy" all the time, and if we are not, something is drastically wrong. This unrealistic expectation often prolongs and adds to our misery (since we tell ourselves we shouldn't be miserable!). 

This more (dare I say!) *enlightened* understanding of psychological suffering as multi-faceted loosens the intuition of the binary. We do not see our mental-wellbeing in one of two states, but instead, we see it continually fluctuating on a spectrum. Our exact position is determined by many factors that vary with time, place, circumstance, and more. This non-binary way of thinking about mental illness has made me more compassionate with others and, perhaps most importantly, with myself. Freud's insight into the importance of us self-aware animals to understand our psychological suffering is compelling. Meditation helps do that. It is by training in self-awareness we begin to recognize how we are all a bit crazy. 

To advance this understanding at a societal level, using the term *duhkha*, especially by mental health researchers and professionals, helps for reasons that are beyond stylistic. First, the concept of *duhkha* already has an incredible amount of philosophical work behind it. The Buddha was around two thousand years ahead of the game, and the alleviation of *duhkha* is the impetus of Buddhism. This philisophical work, in general, is not theistic nor rooted in indefensible metaphysics, so it fits into a modern, secular society. Another reason to use the term *duhkha* is to give credit where it is due. The most "advanced" academic institutions that study the mind and brain are only just accepting and understanding this ancient practice. A non-western term like *duhkha* helps break the illusion of the intellectual infallibility of the West. To make every psychological term sound like it was the brainchild of a Harvard neuroscientist obfuscates the contributions of non-dominant cultures to the collective knowledge pool.  Countless contributions have been lost to history because credit was not given. Also, dominant culture needs to seek out, often overlooked, non-dominant perspectives to overcome the blindness that comes from defining the norm. Using terms like *duhkha* helps remind us of this need.

Many researchers have studied *duhkha* without using the term. In many instances, researchers found that it anticipates and even triggers severe mental disorders, which unequivocally inflicts psycho-pathological suffering. The two kinds of suffering are no doubt related. Studies suggest they might have a bidirectional relationship where they both influence one another.

I do not think there is a clear, clinical way to tease the two apart. I anticipate many think that the conceptual distinction loses its value because it cannot be objectively identified across patients to categorize suffering. I recognize the lack of objectivity as a practical limitation, which makes *duhkha* prone to misuse or misidentification, but not as a problem by itself. To, based on a need for objectivity, reduce psychological suffering to biology is inexcusably harmful. The fetish for objectivity is one I will discuss in part III of the essay. 

Unlike medical treatment, a treatment that focuses on perception increases the sense of agency rather than diminishes it. This sense of agency increases resilience, and leads to better mental health[^7]. *Duhkha* can be something each of us can overcome with meditation, and it is an empowering process. One finds confidence in treating themselves. I am arguing for a place for meditation in addition to, and not (necessarily) in place of, existing mental health treatments. It is a place it deserves in medical systems and in society for everyone's wellbeing.  

### Conclusion
Meditation is not a silver bullet for suffering, mental disorders, happiness, a good life, or for society's challenges. Non-judgmental observation of the mind and body develops self-understanding and awareness. Equipped with the meditator's perspective, we can better understanding of dukkha. With it, one can navigate and experience life more fully. 

Western society tends to brush it off as pseudo-science in the face of "hard," "real," scientific," and "objective" knowledge. This hostility makes communicating its value more difficult than it already is. Individuals generally need to try it before they can appreciate it. In my experience, cultural prejudice prevents many from even trying it. When you strip away all the baggage that comes with the term and the practice, it is logical. The mind is how and where we experience the world. It is where our identity seems to be. Therefore, it makes sense to observe it closely. This practice is meditation. It is a powerful tool that is marvelously simple. 

In this part (Part I), I motivated meditation as training in self-awareness to deal with and understand *duhkha*. In the context of mental illness, I carved out a place for meditation in the abstract, as a tool to retrain self-harming patterns of perception. In part II*, insofar as I can overcome the necessity of experience, I explain the conditioned patterns of perception I have vaguely alluded to here. I develop and precisely define the mediator's perspective as an alternative way one can understand and react to the world better. In the third and final part, I focus on the philosophical questions and implications of that perspective. 

When I was 18, talking about meditation was embarrassing. It was not cool, and it didn't fit the toxic masculine mold of invulnerability that society had drilled into me. Now I can't shut up about it. It is the topic of my first piece of writing I have publicly published. If you read no further or skimmed the entire essay, I hope you give meditation an honest try. It is an essential part of who I am, and certainly changed me and my perspective for the better. 


**END of Part I**

---

Thank you to the wonderful Isabelle Pride and brilliant Mohini Gupta for reading multiple drafts, making edits to this essay, and discussing them with me. Thanks to many others for reading versions and for their feedback. I am working on the next two parts, which I will publish before the end of August!

This essay is the first I have written to publish. If you have **any** feedback, from a missing comma to disagreement with the premise, please email me at [arman.jindal@columbia.edu](mailto:arman.jindal@columbia.edu). My philosophy is to always updating this essay whenever I feel like it is necessary. Knowledge must be shared and questioned. Beliefs must be updated in light of new evidence or unconsidered experience. I could think of no more delightful compliments than critical feedback. If you have had an experience related to anything I have discussed, I would love to hear about it. 


A few have asked me for information on the retreat. I will discuss it more in the other parts, but you can find out all you need at over [dhamma.org](https://www.dhamma.org/) is where you can find it. They are an interesting organization. You are not allowed to donate any money until you have completed a course. Donations from old students fund most retreats. I can testify to the socio-economic diversity. As an organization, they are invested in making it accessible. Meal, accommodation, and instruction are all free for the full ten days.

### Footnote
[^1]: Wikipedia. Duḥkha. Available at: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Du%E1%B8%A5kha> 
[^2]: Gunaratana, B., *What Exactly Is Vipassana Meditation?*. Tricycle: The Buddhist Review. Available at: <https://tricycle.org/magazine/vipassana-meditation/> 
[^3]: Frank RG, Conti RM, Goldman HH. *Mental health policy and psychotropic drugs.* Milbank Q. 2005;83(2):271-298. Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2690138/>
[^4]: Miller, S., 2016. 1 In 6 Americans Takes A Psychiatric Drug. Scientific American. Available at: <https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/1-in-6-americans-takes-a-psychiatric-drug/> 
[^5]: Horgan, J., 2016. *Psychiatrists Must Face Possibility That Medications Hurt More Than They Help*. Scientific American Blog Network. Available at: <https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/psychiatrists-must-face-possibility-that-medications-hurt-more-than-they-help/> 
[^6]: Shwartz, M., 2007. *Robert Sapolsky Discusses Physiological Effects Of Stress*. Stanford University. Available at: <https://news.stanford.edu/news/2007/march7/sapolskysr-030707.html>
[^7]: Färber F, Rosendahl J. The Association Between Resilience and Mental Health in the Somatically Ill. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018;115(38):621-627. Available at: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6218704/pdf/Dtsch_Arztebl_Int-115_0621.pdf>


